User/dahoehna/api contracts (#2110)
microsoft/WindowsAppSDK: docs/WinRTAPIContracts.md

> # Windows App SDK API Contracts

Reviewer: Reads more like a spec than coding guidelines. Mostly it's WHY and little on the HOWTO guide for developers writing code.

SUGGESTION: Move this to `specs\WinRT\WinRTAPIContracts.md` and once mostly baked out add a `docs/Coding-Guidelines/WinRTAPIContracts.md` focused on the HOWTO guidance for devs writing code with a link to the spec for those who want to know WHY

## Summary

> Customers trust Microsoft that the products we make are sound, and will work.  Windows App SDK (WASDK) has recently released version 1.0.  As WASDK evolvs and more developers use WASDK in their own projects WASDK needs a way to guarantee that the API’s that ship are stable and that API versions are well documented.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Customers trust Microsoft that the products we make are sound, and will work.  Windows App SDK (WASDK) has recently released version 1.0.  As WASDK evolves and more developers use WASDK in their own projects, WASDK needs a way to guarantee that the APIs that ship are stable and that API versions are well documented.
```

Document throughout needs a few spelling/grammar passes. Some nits that apply globally:
* Style nit: Remove double-space after full stop `.` (L14)
* Consistency nit: Remove `.` (L15) or add `.` to bulleted items (create global consistency)

Author: Never have I ever thought I'd be called out for adding two spaces after a period.

Author: >  add . to bulleted items (create global consistency)

Can you please explain?  All the lists are numbered.  Is there a list somewhere else that I can't see?

> Customers trust Microsoft that the products we make are sound, and will work.  Windows App SDK (WASDK) has recently released version 1.0.  As WASDK evolvs and more developers use WASDK in their own projects WASDK needs a way to guarantee that the API’s that ship are stable and that API versions are well documented.

Reviewer: TYPO: evolves

To keep customers’ trust in WASDK, and to make sure the WASDK API’s are
1.  Binary compatible
2.  Stable
3.  Customizable so developers can include only the parts they want

Contracts, and contract versions should be added to WASDK.

## Architecture Decisions
1. Contract boundaries

> Contracts will be split among the winmd boundaries.  This is a good medium between having 1 contract for everything, and 1 contract per class.

Reviewer 3: Currently, `Microsoft.UI.Xaml.winmd` contains the `Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls` namespace. However, there's no reason that this always needs to be the case. The level of granularity that is required is: "contracts won't span across feeder repos", aka "at least one contract per feeder repo".

Because functionality is typically grouped by namespace, and API contracts will also follow functionality groups, we should expect a lot of overlap between API contracts and namespaces. In other words, the mapping between API contracts and namespaces won't be prescribed, but will be a common natural occurence.

> Contracts will be split among the winmd boundaries.  This is a good medium between having 1 contract for everything, and 1 contract per class.

Author: We should all have a conversation about this.  Microsoft.Windows.System contains only EM.  Microsoft.Windows.Power contains only power notifications.

Some winmd's have one namespace have one API.

2. Contract numbering.

> Contracts will be numbered with MAJOR.MINOR.  Any update to the API is a MAJOR change.  Any servicing update is a MINOR change.

Reviewer 4: Contract versions already have semantics, but since they were originally designed for platform use, they have no notion of a "breaking" change semantic. For now, I do like the idea of using the minor version number to indicate contract increments within the 1.* Windows App SDK series, but I think at this time we should leave it as an open issue as to how we might handle breaking changes. The contract numbering is primarily to indicate ordering of when things are introduced, but the numbers themselves are mostly meaningless outside of the inner workings of the type system. There is an "is contract present" API but the type / API checks are preferred over contract checks (IsContractPresent further suggests that within a contract there's never breaking changes, breaking change might imply new contract name).

Reviewer 3: I think that each release of the Windows App SDK should increment the *major* version, but not because we're using API contracts to imply a degree of change or compat (aka semantic versioning).

API contracts should increment the major version because, like @BenJKuhn indicated, the contract versioning indicates a strict ordering of API changes, but the API contract format in WinRT winmds has only major+minor, not major+minor+patch+build - we've already released multiple 0.8.* versions of Windows App SDK, and shouldn't be surprised to see a 1.0.1 release. For this reason alone, it's a **non-goal** for API contract versions to attempt to match Windows App SDK versions.

Incrementing just the major version removes any ambiguity about "which version is next". When deciding what to number the successor to contract 1.0, is it 1.1 or 2.0? Having a clear simple rule is a virtue here.

Another reason is that someday we may need to modify a contract version in a servicing branch, and we need to be able to do it in a way that maintains the strict ordering in contract versions. For example, say we've released Windows App SDK 1.1 and 1.2 containing `FooContract` 1.1 and 1.2, respectively. If we needed to make a change to `FooContract` 1.1, we wouldn't be able to version it properly because we already used up all of our precision/granularity when we released `FooContract` 1.2. We avoid that dilemma by incrementing only major versions of API contracts in stable releases, and keeping the minor version in our pocket as an emergency pressure relief.

## Example
    namespace Microsoft.Windows.System
    {
        [contractversion(2.0)]
        apicontract MicrosoftWindowsSystem
        
        // version 2.0
        [Contract(MicrosoftWindowsSystem(2.0)]
        public enum Scope
        {
            user,
            machine
        }

        [Contract(MicrosoftWindowsSystem(2.0)]
        public class EnvironmentManager
        {
            public String GetEnvironmentVariable(String name, Scope scope);
        }
        
        // servicing
        [Contract(MicrosoftWindowsSystem(1.5)]        
        public class EnvironmentManager
        {
            public String GetEnvironmentVariable(String name, String scope);
        }

        // base version
        [contract(MicrosoftWindowsSystem, 1.0),]
        public class EnvironmentManager
        {
            public String GetEnvironmentVariable(String name);
        }
    }

## 1.1 ship blocker
Any API's that changed between 1.0 and 1.1 need to add a contract or 1.1 will not ship.

## Telemetry
Because all API's have a contract version data can be used to see

>  1. How many people are using each API

Reviewer: I'm not seeing how API contract versions propogate through telemetry. If we add telemetry to include component=`Microsoft.UI.XAML.Control.Button` AND apicontract=`1.1` but I expect winappsdkversion=`1.1.8` (or whatever) is the more useful superset of information (given version you can determine contracts, but not vice versa).

Please elaborate how contracts can be used to via telemetry to provide richer information than available via the alternatives (like winappsdk version).

Reviewer 3: That's a good point about the 1-n mapping between winappsdk and api contracts. Capturing the winappsdk version for telemetry is the more valuable data point.

Author: Oooohhh.  Yeah.  I think I was missing a step in my logic.  I thought developers could choose what versions of APIs to use.  If that isn't the case and developers get whatever version of the API is in their version of Windows App SDK then it does not make sense to include telemetry for API versions.

 2. How many people are using each specific version

This data will allow us to better direct our development efforts to help the most developers.

## Gate check-ins
Because the contracts are used for API versions there will need to be work done in the build system to make sure
1. All API's have contracts
2. Each contract is correct.  This means version and name.

> 3. All Contracts and dependencies work with each other.

Reviewer: What about compatibility? Don't we need reports (detection) of **changes**? maybe even enforcement to reject changes that break compat?

Reviewer 3: Yes. We need to enforce these semantics on contract versioning. Once a contract version has gone into a stable release, any changes to types/APIs in that contract must go into a new version, and compat-breaking changes are forbidden. Specifically, after a release
- Method signatures must not change.
- Struct layouts must not change.
- Interfaces must not add, remove, or reorder methods
- All new properties/methods/events added to a runtimeclass must be put on a new interface, which is on a new contract version.
  - When using MIDL3, the new versioned interface is automatically created by putting the contract version on the added property/method/event.
- Ditto for adding static methods/properties/events to a runtimeclass.
- Enum fields can be added under a new contract version. All other enum changes like reordering, changing, or removing fields, is forbidden.

Author: Can a check like this happen at build time?  In both a developers environment and the internal build system?  Also, should this list be added to a "Forbidden changes" section?

> If there is an issue then the build should stop and no release should be made.

Reviewer 4: ❤️

## Open issues

> 1. Telemetry needed for the data science team. The Data Science team should be involved with our contracts so we can make sure they have the correct data to answer business questions.

Reviewer 4: I didn't think we had telemetry at the contract level. Because contracts are largely a versioning construct for binary compatibility, I don't think it's the right granularity for telemetry, either. We should discuss this one more.

Author: I'm open to discussion.  I would like for us to see what versions of API's are being used.

> 2. Contract boundary.  1 contract for WASDK is too big.  Yet, 1 contract per API is too many.  1 contract per winmd is a good middle.  This is an open issue because there might be a better option.

Reviewer: Depends on the granularity of .winmd. What's the relationship of namespace to winmd, 1:1 or 1:N?

> 3. Should ProjectReunionClosed use contracts?

Reviewer 4: if there are any winrt apis in there, the answer is yes.

Author: Nope.

Author: There are.

Author: I see.  I was referring to the internal-only APIs.  I'll update the document.
